---
layout: page
title: How do city bonds work and how are they funded?
---

## What is a bond issued by a city?

Municipal bonds are a way for a city to raise money for some set of projects.

The city basically says, “We have a lot of taxpayers and we aren’t going
anywhere, so you can trust us to pay back a loan.”

Then bond purchasers, such as life insurance companies, corporations, and other
investors will loan the city money in exchange for a small bit of interest paid
each year. Most of this type of bond interest is also tax deductible on U.S.
federal income taxes, so the bondholders end up saving on their federal tax bill
in addition to the money they make each year from their bonds.

Each bond, like a loan, has a fixed term—a number of months until the bond pays
the money back or “matures.”

## What kinds of bonds are there, and how are they funded?

Cities typically issue two kinds of bonds (take out two kinds of loans from bond
purchasers):

* General obligation bonds – secured by the city’s reputation of payment and
* existing city revenue streams. Revenue bonds – secured by the revenues from a
* specific project, like a toll road or airport.

The Austin City Council issues a number of bonds, with the consent of voters,
every year to fund various new projects and improvements to things in the
general shared interest of city residents.

The city pays the bond interest and maturity by raising revenues in the form of
property taxes. As of 2018, the city taxes property at a rate of 44.48 cents per
$100 of property value. 10.55 of those cents are the “debt rate” and go into the
Debt Service Fund, which the city uses to pay the city’s general obligation
bonds.

For the median Austin homeowner with a home value of $305,510 this comes out to
a tax bill of about $1,250 per year, or $104.17 per month. So the median
homeowner is paying about $24.70 per month to service the city’s bond debt.

## How is Austin doing with bond debt and property tax rates to fund it?

Compared among the five most populous cities in Texas, Austin ranks 3rd for
overall property tax rate, behind the rates found in Dallas and Forth Worth.

[More to come on comparative debt rates and debt funding tax %]

## Sources

* [City of Austin: 2017–2018 Budget](https://assets.austintexas.gov/budget/17-18/downloads/volume_1.pdf)
* [Wikipedia: Municipal bond](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Municipal_bond)
